Question,Citations
"What dictates the delivery of the short-year statement to the customer?","The short-year statement must be delivered based on the timing of the escrow account analysis and the borrower’s loan anniversary date. | Typically, this occurs when there is a mid-year adjustment to the escrow account due to changes in taxes or insurance."
"What happens if a loan is more than 30 days past due at the time of escrow account analysis?","If a loan is more than 30 days past due at the time of escrow account analysis, the servicer may postpone the analysis until the account is current. | The servicer may also require the borrower to catch up on overdue payments before performing the analysis."
"How can a new Servicer determine the new escrow account computation year upon the transfer of servicing?","A new Servicer determines the new escrow account computation year by referencing the date of servicing transfer or by reviewing the loan’s escrow history. | They may also reset the computation year based on when they take over the loan."
"What are the requirements for a customer to be eligible for escrow removal?","A customer can be eligible for escrow removal if they have a good payment history, meet specific loan-to-value requirements, and have paid down the mortgage to a certain percentage. | Additionally, the customer must request the removal and provide proof of adequate insurance if required."
"How long must a customer maintain an escrow account for HPML loans?","For HPML loans, the customer must maintain an escrow account for at least five years from the date of origination. | The account can only be closed if the loan-to-value ratio is below 80% and the borrower is current on payments."
"What happens if a customer wants to spread their escrow shortage payment over more than 12 months?","If a customer wants to spread their escrow shortage payment over more than 12 months, they must request an extended repayment plan from the servicer. | The servicer may allow this option but it could lead to a higher monthly payment."
"What are the insurance policy types required at origination and throughout the life of a Mortgage loan?","The required insurance policy types at origination and throughout the life of a mortgage loan include homeowners insurance, flood insurance if applicable, and mortgage insurance if required by the lender. | The borrower must maintain these policies to comply with the loan agreement."
"What is Lender-Placed Insurance?","Lender-Placed Insurance, also known as force-placed insurance, is a policy the lender buys on behalf of the borrower when the borrower fails to maintain required coverage. | This insurance is generally more expensive and protects only the lender's interest."
"How can customers pay for Private Mortgage Insurance premiums?","Private Mortgage Insurance (PMI) premiums can be paid by the customer either through monthly payments included in the escrow account or as a one-time upfront payment at closing. | The choice depends on the loan terms and customer preference."
"How can an FHA loan benefit a borrower?","An FHA loan can benefit a borrower by offering lower down payment requirements, flexible credit qualifications, and potentially lower interest rates. | It also allows for higher debt-to-income ratios compared to conventional loans."
"How long does a customer have to cash a refund or escrow check before it becomes void?","A customer typically has 180 days to cash a refund or escrow check before it becomes void. | If the check is not cashed within this period, the customer may need to request a reissue or the funds may be returned to the escrow account."
"What action is taken if the escrow refund check is not cashed after 60 days from issue?","If the escrow refund check is not cashed after 60 days from issuance, the servicer may attempt to contact the customer to remind them. | If unclaimed, the funds may eventually be transferred to state unclaimed property departments per applicable laws."
